well let's speak to Mukesh capila about
this he's a former un humanitarian
coordinator joining us from Geneva Mr
capila very good to have you with us
again on Al jazer I know you've had your
share experience o of conflicts with
conflicts when you see what's happening
in Gaza what's happened over the past
five weeks this death total of over
11,11 un workers being killed un schools
targeted did you ever think the conflict
would reach this
level you know I've spent the last 20 30
years in numerous conflicts around the
world ranging from Afghanistan to many
countries in Africa but this one in Gaza
is really unique because it's heavily
concentrated in a one of the most
densely populated places on Earth and us
it uses the most
modern armaments that you can think of
and the and everybody is mixed up
civilians humanitarian workers um Hamas
and
soldiers of All Sorts so the fact that
civilians are are being killed in record
numbers and also the humanitarian
workers is just a tragic inevitability
in the sort of conflict that is being
waged yeah it shouldn't happen this way
and I think the way the the war is being
waged is in my opinion somewhat careless
compared to some of the other situations
that I've seen in Iraq and elsewhere
where I think we had much fewer
casualties than we are currently
witnessing at the moment yeah and the
way the war is being raged is really an
issue here isn't it uh we've seen un
workers humanitarian workers targeted
schools that shelter uh uh people who
are seeking uh shelter in in un schools
being targeted as well we've heard the
Israelis say they're targeting these
buildings and hospitals and so on and
even humanitarian workers because they
have connections to Hamas to the the uh
fighters in Gaza the UN Ambassador in
the Israeli Ambassador at the United
Nations has even accused uh some unra
workers of being uh members of Hamas how
do you think that is going to impact and
change humanitarian work in the
future I think first to say that it
doesn't matter what groups workers
belong to but if they're Aid workers and
unless they're carrying guns and I
haven't heard them going around carrying
guns in ambulances or rescue workers
from the rubble carrying guns while
they're rescuing so I
think whoever you are hamus or not hamus
if you an aid worker then you should be
protected by International uh law so I
think what we are seeing now is that all
rules are broken down and there are no
norms and because this is a whole of a
society war with no Norms being observed
but there are really no rules at all
therefore what we need what needs to
happen therefore is rescue from outside
we need more of not people leaving
leaving Northern Gaza because they can't
because the corridors are blocked and
there's too dangerous to move but maybe
they need to be rescued by people coming
in from outside into the territory yeah
but people haven't been able to come in
outside uh from to the territory from
outside very little Aid has gone into
the territory from outside I mean you
you have experience in this how do you
prioritize what to send when you see the
level of Devastation and destruction
that Gaza has experienced in the past
five
weeks well they need on the humanitarian
stuff they literally need need
everything whether it's food or water or
essential medicines so I think almost
anything is is needed it's not a matter
of priorities it's a matter of really
all forms of life- saving Aid that that
are needed I think there are no easy
answers to this one other than the
cessation of the of the of the fighting
and allowing a pause or a ceasefire as
people are debating this at the present
time I do not think you can you can
magic up any solutions to to the ongoing
human suffering and that's a sad reality
Now everywhere else where I worked at
there have been islands of Tranquility
corridors or pauses which have allowed
Aid to be brought in and I think this is
what needs to happen in in Gaza now if
if the if the if Israel doesn't want to
do that then I'm afraid the suffering is
going to continue and unless you're
thinking about some kind of external
Intervention which you done in other
countries obviously it's not going to
happen here external intervention who
who what external intervention and and
what role for the United Nations in this
conflict the UN has been polarized and
paralyzed over over this issue in Gaza
what role could it be playing here that
it's
not well the un's traditional role has
been peacemaking and peacekeeping but
because of the polarized nature of the
United Nations at the present time
Security Council general assembly and so
on then it's a peacemaking role is I
think dead at the present time now as
far as peacekeeping role is concerned we
have some un peacekeepers up at the top
but because Israel has taken umage at
the remarks of the UN Secretary General
I doubt that Israel is going to allow
any un peacekeeping role which leaves us
with the un's humanitarian role
alongside that of the Red Cross red
Cresent system and I think that's what
the UN is concentrating on it's
different organizations Under World food
program World Health Organization UNICEF
and and so on but the risks they are
taking are such with more than 100
people killed that I do not think they
can do much more than that and can't
humanely ask Aid workers to go where
actually even soldiers would find it
more difficult to pray Mr capila Mukesh
capila thank you so much for talking to
us on Al jaaz thank you for joining us
Mukesh capila is a former un
humanitarian coordinator live there from
Geneva